Joy Nelson came into the room that she was sharing with two other girls,
at half-past four in the morning. She was tired. She had been dancing
steadily all night; her new silver slippers were killing her; and she
was not accustomed to being up late. She could hardly wait to take her
slippers off and get ready to sleep for a few hours.

Her room-mates, however, looked as if repose were the last thought they
would allow to enter their jazz-surrounded heads. They were sitting on
the bed, smoking. She had pretended not to see them, until she realized
that they were not in the least bit embarrassed. They had even offered
her a cigarette!

“My word, you look shot,” said Jerry. Jerry was a fascinating girl, Joy
had decided. She was not pretty—she was more than that. She had what
the erudite youth of the day would describe vividly as “something about
her.” Her dark hair was bobbed, and she had green eyes and a red mouth.
Her nose turned up, her scintillant face was splashed with freckles;
decidedly, she was not pretty; but she was fascinating. One never could
tell what she was going to do next. Joy had seen her openly chewing gum
in the Kappa Beta living-room. One of the chaperones had lifted her
eyebrows. Jerry never missed a demonstration. In less time than it took
to lift the eyebrow of censure, she had surrounded herself with a mob of
laughing, delighted boys, and exacted a penny from each of them for the
privilege of a chew at her gum. There was never a dull moment, with
Jerry around.

Sarah was another sort. She had burst upon Joy in a flash of colour that
rioted away analytical estimation. Such eyes, lips, cheeks—and
wonderfully marcelled hair. Later, when Sarah’s tools were set out on
the one bureau, revelation had forced analysis. Yes, Sarah was
undoubtedly a Woman of the World. She oozed sophistication at every
pore. As crowning touch, she even had a gold cigarette case!